Monitoring network traffic
helps security
professionals detect,
prevent, and respond
to attacks.
In my experience as a
security professional,
monitoring for deviations from
typical network traffic patterns
has yielded big results.
Even if information
is encrypted,
monitoring network
traffic is still
important for security purposes.
Let's discuss how the
detection and response
process might work in a
data exfiltration attack.
First, we'll outline the
attacker's perspective.
Before attackers can
perform data exfiltration,
they'll need to
gain initial access
into a network and
computer system.
This can be done
through a social
engineering attack
like phishing,
which tricks people into
disclosing sensitive data.
Attackers can send phishing
emails with attachments or
links that trick their target
into entering their credentials.
Now, an attacker has
successfully gained
access to their device.
After gaining their
initial position into
the system, an attacker
won't stop there.
The goal for attackers
is to maintain access in
the environment and avoid being
detected for as
long as possible.
To do this, they'll perform
a tactic known as lateral
movement, or pivoting.
This is when they'll spend time
exploring the network
with the goal of
expanding and
maintaining their access
to other systems on the network.
As an attacker pivots
in the network,
they'll scope out
the environment
to identify valuable assets,
such as sensitive data
like proprietary code,
personally identifiable
information like
names and addresses,
or financial records.
They'll do this by searching
locations such as
network file shares,
intranet sites, code
repositories, and more.
After the attacker identifies
the assets of value,
they'll need to
collect, package,
and prepare the data for
exfiltration outside of
the organization's network and
into the attacker's hands.
One way they may do this is
by reducing the data size.
This helps attackers hide
the stolen data and
bypass security controls.
Finally, the attacker
will exfiltrate
the data to their
destination of choice.
There are many ways to
do this. For example,
attackers can email
the stolen data to
themselves using the
compromised email account.
Now that you've tapped into
the attacker's perspective,
let's explore how organizations
can defend against
this type of attack.
First, security teams must
prevent attacker access.
There are many methods
you can use to
protect your network
from phishing attempts.
For example, requiring users
to use multi-factor
authentication.
Attackers that gain
access to a network
can remain unnoticed
for a while.
It's important that
security teams
monitor network activity to
identify any suspicious activity
that can indicate a compromise.
For example, multiple
user logins coming from
IP addresses outside of
the network should
be investigated.
Earlier, you examined how
to identify, classify,
and protect assets using
asset inventories and
security controls.
As part of an organization's
security policy,
all assets should be cataloged
in an asset inventory.
The appropriate security
controls should also be applied
to protect these assets
from unauthorized access.
Lastly, if a data exfiltration
attack is successful,
security teams must detect
and stop the exfiltration.
To detect the attack,
indicators of unusual
data collection can
be identified through
network monitoring.
These include: large
internal file transfers,
large external uploads,
and unexpected file writes.
SIEM tools can detect an
alert on these activities.
Once an alert has been sent out,
security teams investigate and
stop the attack from continuing.
There are many ways to
stop an attack like this.
For instance, once the unusual
activity is identified,
you can block the IP addresses
associated with the attacker
using firewall rules.
Data exfiltration
attacks are just one of
many attacks that can be
detected through
network monitoring.
Coming up, you'll learn
how to monitor and
analyze network communications
using packet sniffers.